As discussed previously, we established the idea that using IAM roles is more secure
than provisioning IAM users for console access
in managing API keys for programmatic access.
Identity federation allows an organization to
manage identities using an external identity provider
instead of attempting to provision and manage
user identities from within the AWS environment.
Identity providers can provide
role-based access control maps to IAM roles and AWS accounts.
What are some examples of external identity providers?
Your corporate active directory,
Cloud-based identity providers such as Okta,
OneLogin, Ping, Centrify, AWS, SSO, etc.
Web identity providers such as Facebook, Google, or Amazon.
When a user requires access to AWS,
the user can authenticate with
an identity provider which supports SAML tool data assertion
such as ADFS to assume an IAM role and obtain temporary API credentials.
If a mobile or web application requires access to the AWS API,
the user of that application can authenticate with
a web identity provider that supports OpenID Connect,
such as Facebook, Google, or Amazon.
This will allow the application to assume
an IAM role and obtain temporary API credentials.
Let's quickly define SAML and OpenID assertion.
SAML assertion refers to the process of obtaining
a document from an identity provider such as ADFS.
This is sent to the service provider,
AWS in this case,
and contains the user authorization.
With OpenID, an assertion token is obtained
from the identity providers such as Google or Facebook.
This is sent to the service provider,
AWS in this case, for user authorization.
The two primary security benefits of incorporating
identity federation are that organizations can centrally managed users,
their identities and authentication,
the various roles with respect to access to various applications and platforms.
This will allow on-boarding and off-boarding of an employee's access to entities such as
AWS to be seamless and compliant with
an organization's approval and off-boarding processes.
An example of this would be an employee that has access to multiple AWS accounts,
Azure, Windows servers, corporate VPN, etc.
If the employee leaves the organization,
this access can be revoked centrally.
Identity federation removes the need to use AWS,
IAM users, and user API keys.
Access to the API is then always dependent on IAM roles via federation.
Let's go through an example architecture that incorporates identity federation
for AWS users that need to access AWS services.
A DevOps user in your organization uses a client apps such as their browser or
CLI tools to request authentication from your organization's identity provider.
The identity provider constructs a SAML assertion with information
about the user and their role and sends the assertion to the client app.
The client app calls AWS assumed role with SAML through the API,
passing the ARN of the SAML provider,
the ARN of the role to assume and the SAML assertion from the identity provider.
The API response to the client app includes temporary security credentials.
The client app then uses
the temporary security credentials to call Amazon S3 API operations.
Let's see how it would work if you want to use identity federation for an application.
With web identity federation,
the app calls a third party identity provider to authenticate the user and the app.
The identity provider returns a web identity token to the app.
The app calls AWS and passes the web identity token as an input.
AWS authorizes the app and gives a temporary access credentials.
The app is allowed to assume an IAM role and access
AWS resources in accordance with the rules security policy.
The app calls the S3 service to retrieve the data that it needs.